Blog post about querying Hub with DuckDB (#1177)
huggingface/blog: hub-duckdb.md

<div class="flex justify-center">
  <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/datasets-server/oasst1_light.png"/>
</div>
<small>A preview of the OpenAssistant dataset with the Dataset Viewer.</small>

We are happy to share that we recently added another feature to help you analyze datasets on the Hub; you can run SQL queries with DuckDB on any dataset stored on the Hub! According to the 2022 [StackOverflow Developer Survey](https://survey.stackoverflow.co/2022/#section-most-popular-technologies-programming-scripting-and-markup-languages), SQL is the 3rd most popular programming language. We also wanted a fast database management system (DBMS) designed for running analytical queries, which is why we’re excited about integrating with [DuckDB](https://duckdb.org/). Together, we hope this allows even more users to access and analyze datasets on the Hub!

## TLDR

> [Datasets Server](https://huggingface.co/docs/datasets-server/index) automatically converts datasets on the Hub to Parquet files and returns a URL to the dataset which can be accessed with a simple HTTP call.

Reviewer: (last nit) Maybe mention the " Auto-converted to Parquet" link on a dataset page that @severo just added?
It might be easier to use than doing GET requests
```suggestion
[Datasets Server](https://huggingface.co/docs/datasets-server/index) automatically converts datasets on the Hub to Parquet files, that you can see by clicking on the "Auto-converted to Parquet" button at the top of a dataset page. You can also access the list of the Parquet files URLs with a simple HTTP call.
```

```py

> r = requests.get("https://datasets-server.huggingface.co/parquet?dataset=blog_authorship_corpus")

Reviewer 2: it currently gives an error. The root error is: https://datasets-server.huggingface.co/parquet?dataset=blog_authorship_corpus&config=blog_authorship_corpus

```
{"error":"list index out of range"}
```

Reviewer 2: I'll try to fix in datasets-server.

Reviewer 2: cc @lhoestq @albertvillanova

Reviewer 2: https://huggingface.co/datasets/blog_authorship_corpus/blob/main/blog_authorship_corpus.py#L38

Reviewer 2: I think we should change the example dataset.

Reviewer: I can reupload the dataset, give me a few minutes

Reviewer: opened a PR at https://huggingface.co/datasets/blog_authorship_corpus/discussions/2

Reviewer: fixed ! 

<details>

```json
// 20230606182751
// https://datasets-server.huggingface.co/parquet?dataset=blog_authorship_corpus

{
  "parquet_files": [
    {
      "dataset": "blog_authorship_corpus",
      "config": "blog_authorship_corpus",
      "split": "train",
      "url": "https://huggingface.co/datasets/blog_authorship_corpus/resolve/refs%2Fconvert%2Fparquet/blog_authorship_corpus/blog_authorship_corpus-train-00000-of-00002.parquet",
      "filename": "blog_authorship_corpus-train-00000-of-00002.parquet",
      "size": 301216503
    },
    {
      "dataset": "blog_authorship_corpus",
      "config": "blog_authorship_corpus",
      "split": "train",
      "url": "https://huggingface.co/datasets/blog_authorship_corpus/resolve/refs%2Fconvert%2Fparquet/blog_authorship_corpus/blog_authorship_corpus-train-00001-of-00002.parquet",
      "filename": "blog_authorship_corpus-train-00001-of-00002.parquet",
      "size": 152312736
    },
    {
      "dataset": "blog_authorship_corpus",
      "config": "blog_authorship_corpus",
      "split": "validation",
      "url": "https://huggingface.co/datasets/blog_authorship_corpus/resolve/refs%2Fconvert%2Fparquet/blog_authorship_corpus/blog_authorship_corpus-validation.parquet",
      "filename": "blog_authorship_corpus-validation.parquet",
      "size": 24997972
    }
  ],
  "pending": [
    
  ],
  "failed": [
    
  ]
}
```

</details>

Reviewer 2: ur ze best

Reviewer 3: > cc @lhoestq @albertvillanova

Thanks for the ping, @severo

```py
import duckdb

url = "https://huggingface.co/datasets/blog_authorship_corpus/resolve/refs%2Fconvert%2Fparquet/blog_authorship_corpus/blog_authorship_corpus-train-00000-of-00002.parquet"

con = duckdb.connect()
con.execute("INSTALL httpfs;")
con.execute("LOAD httpfs;")
```

Once you’re connected, you can start writing SQL queries!

```sql
con.sql(f"SELECT horoscope, 
	count(*), 
	AVG(LENGTH(text)) AS avg_blog_length 
	FROM '{url}' 
	GROUP BY horoscope 
	ORDER BY avg_blog_length 
	DESC LIMIT(5)"
)
```

To learn more, check out the [documentation](https://huggingface.co/docs/datasets-server/parquet_process).

## From dataset to Parquet

[Parquet](https://parquet.apache.org/docs/) files are columnar, making them more efficient to store, load and analyze. This is especially important when you're working with large datasets, which we’re seeing more and more of in the LLM era. To support this, Datasets Server automatically converts and publishes a dataset on the Hub as Parquet files. The URL to the Parquet files can be retrieved with the [`/parquet`](https://huggingface.co/docs/datasets-server/quick_start#access-parquet-files) endpoint.

## Analyze with DuckDB

> DuckDB offers super impressive performance for running complex analytical queries. It is able to execute a SQL query directly on a Parquet file without any overhead. With the [`httpfs`](https://duckdb.org/docs/extensions/httpfs) extension, DuckDB is able to query remote files such as datasets stored on the Hub using the URL provided from the `/parquet` endpoint. DuckDB also supports querying multiple Parquet files which is really convenient because Datasets Server shards big datasets into smaller 1GB chunks.

Reviewer 2: I think it's 500MB, not 1GB (https://github.com/huggingface/datasets/blob/02ee418831aba68d0be93227bce8b3f42ef8980f/src/datasets/config.py#L187). Could you confirm @lhoestq.

By the way, our docs say 1GB too (https://github.com/huggingface/datasets-server/blob/adbdcd6710ffed4e2eb2e4cd905b5e0dff530a15/docs/source/parquet.mdx?plain=1#L110).
